Does something exist
because you believe it does?
Does something not exist
simply because you don’t believe in it?
No.
Truth is based on evidence.
But what kind of evidence convinces you
that something exists?
We believe in many things we can’t see
—air, wind, atoms, electricity,
gravity, time.
And we believe in things we can’t hear
—galaxies, dog whistles, microorganisms.
We also believe in things we can’t feel,
such as our brain
or the rotation of the earth.
But why?
What convinces you?
The effects
—effects that you can see, hear,
feel, and measure—
and the testimony
from those who know the facts.
Evidence
—evidence is the basis for faith.
Today, many people don’t believe
that God exists.
Their lack of faith can affect us.
Indeed, our faith is under attack.
This symposium will remind us
of our reasons for faith
and will help us to strengthen our faith.
We’ll consider why we have faith
in God’s existence,
in his Word, in his moral standards,
and in his love.
First, why is faith in God’s existence
important?
Please find Ephesians chapter 2,
and notice how the apostle Paul describes
Christians in Ephesus
before they knew the true God.
Ephesians 2:1 reads:
“Furthermore, God made you alive,
though you were dead
in your trespasses and sins.”
And verse 12 continues:
“At that time you were without Christ,
“alienated from the state of Israel,
“strangers to the covenants of the promise;
you had no hope
and were without God in the world.”
The same was true for us.
But faith in the existence of the Creator
has given our lives meaning and purpose.
It has unlocked the answers
to such questions as,
‘Why does the universe exist?’
and ‘What does the future hold?’
True, there are people
who shy away from such questions,
thinking that the answers are just beyond us.
Some even teach that there is no purpose,
no ultimate meaning in life.
But where does that leave them?
Without reliable guidance.
In contrast, notice what Psalm 111:10
teaches us about the effect of our faith.
Psalm 111:10 says:
“The fear of Jehovah
“is the beginning of wisdom.
“All those observing his orders
“show good insight.
His praise endures forever.”
Yes, clear thinking
and practical application of knowledge
begin with regarding the Creator with awe
and profound respect.
And as indicated in the very next verse,
this makes us happier people.
That’s why we need to safeguard our faith.
It’s the foundation
for our relationship with God,
the basis for our hope,
the key to our future.
So let’s remind ourselves
why we can have faith in God’s existence.
Let’s go back to the chapter of the Bible
that defines faith
—Hebrews chapter 11.
Hebrews 11:1 tells us
that faith is the convincing evidence
of “realities that are not seen.”
But now, what would be an example of that?
Let’s read together Hebrews 11:3.
It says: “By faith we perceive
“that the systems of things
were put in order by God’s word,
“so that what is seen has come into existence
from things that are not visible.”
“The systems of things”
—what might be some of those systems?
Could this include our solar system
—and the galactic system that it’s a part of—
and the smaller cycles
that occur within our solar system?
Think about our earth’s atmosphere,
which protects us from the sun’s harmful rays
while at the same time allowing the entry
of essential heat and light.
Just think what would happen to us
were it not for our atmosphere’s
protective shield.
We’d burn up in seconds.
And besides blocking out harmful rays,
the atmosphere,
along with earth’s magnetic field,
also absorbs much of the debris
that flies through space.
By faith, we perceive that these “systems”
were put in order by God’s word.
Or think about the earth’s amazing cycles.
Imagine what would happen
if a city’s water supply
—it’s fresh air, it’s water—
were disrupted and the sewers were blocked?
What would be
the quality of life in that city?
And yet, our planet is a closed system.
Clean air and water
are not shipped in from outer space.
Waste matter is not rocketed out.
So how does the earth
remain healthy and habitable?
The water cycle,
the carbon and oxygen cycles,
and the nitrogen cycle
are all tuned precisely to sustain life.
Of course, this doesn’t mean that we can be
careless stewards of our planet.
But what remarkable systems!
And much more could be said
about the earth’s perfect location
in our solar system
or about the planet’s perfect orbit, tilt,
rotational speed, an unusual moon,
or about our solar system’s perfect position
in the Milky Way.
Are all of these precise locations
and elegant measurements
the result of blind chance
or of purposeful design?
As you watch the following video,
note yet another example
of how the order evident in creation
clearly points to an all-wise Creator.
Our bodies are made up of trillions of cells.
Yet, each individual cell
is a marvel of design and organization.
Inside our cells,
biological processes signal specific proteins
to assemble themselves into tracks
called microtubules.
Tiny molecular machines called kinesins
then transport various components
to different parts of the cell
by “walking” along the tracks.
From microscopic proteins
to enormous galaxies,
our organized universe abounds
with examples of elegant design.
How can you strengthen your faith
in God’s existence?
Consider three things that we can do.
Please open your Bibles to Romans chapter 1.
When we consider examples like these,
of God’s power and wisdom,
doesn’t that make us wonder,
‘How could anyone deny the evidence
of an intelligent and loving Designer?’
Romans 1:18 indicates
that such denial
requires suppressing the truth.
Why?
Well, notice what it says at Romans 1:19:
“Because what may be known about God
“is clearly evident
“[clearly evident] among them,
for God made it clear to them.”
Verse 20 says:
“For his invisible qualities are clearly seen
“from the world’s creation onward,
“because they are perceived
by the things made,
“even his eternal power and Godship,
“so that they
[namely those who suppress the truth]
are inexcusable.”
God’s existence and his qualities
were apparent the moment
mankind first appeared on earth.
And the evidence has only become clearer
with the passage of time
and the advancement of technology
that enables us to discover
what God has done.
So that’s the first way that we strengthen
our faith in God’s existence
—through study and meditation—
meditating on the evidence.
And to help us with this,
we find an abundance of published material
about creation on jw.org,
where we find brochures,
articles in the series “Was It Designed?”
and interviews with scientists.
The second way that we strengthen our faith
is by earnestly praying for more faith.
Jesus said, as recorded at Luke 11:13,
that ‘God will give his holy spirit
to those asking him for it,’
and part of that spirit’s fruitage is faith.
Third, we strengthen our faith
by building the faith of others.
How?
By drawing attention to the evidence
that supports the truth.
Parents, patiently build
the faith of your children.
If they have doubts,
address them promptly, kindly, calmly.
Don’t dismiss their questions,
and don’t get upset.
Be glad they asked.
It shows they care,
and they want to understand.
Accept the challenge; present the evidence.
Look for it together
“when you sit in your house . . .
when you walk on the road . . .
when you lie down and when you get up.”
In the following video,
note what strengthens the faith
of one of our brothers who is a scientist.
As a mechanical design educator,
I view even natural things
from a design perspective.
Mechanical design considers not only
the individual components of a machine
but also how they interact.
From this viewpoint, human vision
is a magnificent example of design.
For a single eye,
the cornea, the iris, and the lens
interact to focus an image on the retina.
The light-sensitive cells of the retina,
called photoreceptors,
produce nerve signals.
Signals from the rod and cone photoreceptors
are transmitted by the optic nerve
to the brain,
where they are processed
to produce a perceived image.
Now just imagine
the multiplied complexity
when two eyes interact.
Particularly mind-boggling is
the amount of information
being constantly processed
by more than 130 million retinal receptors
and then transmitted
through the 1.2 million nerve fibers
of the optic nerve to the brain.
To me, the sheer complexity
of how all these components
flawlessly interact
is evidence of a superior Designer.
Some disagree.
They propose that the eye evolved
from a light-sensitive patch
in some ancestral creature
through small random changes.
I find the proposed process unrealistic.
Unlike design,
it is unplanned and without a goal.
We are asked to imagine that a complex system
can develop without direction,
while in the natural world
things tend to become disorganized.
But consider something
even more mind-boggling:
The design of the eye,
the optic nerve, and the brain
and how they function and interact
are completely documented in our DNA.
In fact, our DNA
contains all the instructions
for building an entire human body.
While science relies
only on physical explanations,
many individual scientists reason
that highly ordered natural systems
are evidence of a Designer.
My personal conclusion is
that there is a God who is revealed
in the magnificent designs of nature.
How does faith in God’s existence benefit us?
Having genuine faith in the loving,
intelligent Designer of this universe
gives our lives meaning and purpose.
That faith is the basis for obedience
to Jehovah’s righteous standards
—standards that benefit us.
And we don’t fear the future,
because faith gives us hope.
We don’t fear death,
because our hope is in the Source of life.
How happy we are that Jehovah has provided
abundant evidence that he exists!
And yet, are there facets
of Jehovah’s personality
that we couldn’t fully comprehend
from a study of creation alone?
Yes.
And for this we need to study
his inspired Word.
How can we strengthen
our faith in God’s Word?
Please pay careful attention
to Brother Mark Noumair,
a helper to the Teaching Committee,
as he now presents
the next talk of this symposium,
“Why We Have Faith in . . . God’s Word.”